LCEL BASICS FOR BEGINNERS

What LCEL is
LCEL stands for LangChain Expression Language.
It is LangChain's simple way to connect steps together into a workflow.

The most basic LCEL idea looks like this:
prompt | model | parser

That means:
- the prompt creates the instruction
- the model reads the instruction and generates an answer
- the parser converts the answer into the format you want to use

Why LCEL exists
LCEL makes AI workflows easier to read, build, and reuse.
Instead of writing one large block of logic, you connect small steps together.

This is useful because AI applications often need more than one step.
For example:
- build a prompt
- send it to a model
- clean the output
- maybe pass that output into another step

Why chaining AI workflows is important
Real AI apps are usually not just one model call.
They often need a sequence of actions.

Examples:
- question -> retrieve context -> prompt model -> return answer
- user input -> classify request -> choose tool -> format result
- raw text -> summarize -> extract action items -> save output

Chaining matters because it helps you:
- keep each step small and understandable
- test each step more easily
- swap one step without rewriting the whole workflow
- build more advanced apps later, such as agents, RAG systems, or tool-using assistants

How to think about LCEL
Think of LCEL like a pipeline.
Data goes in on the left, moves through each step, and comes out on the right.

Example idea:
input topic -> prompt template -> model -> string output

How this repo's LCEL.py works
Your file uses a very small demo chain:

1. A prompt template creates a sentence like:
   Explain LCEL in one short sentence.

2. A fake model step receives that prompt.
   In your file this is not a real AI model yet.
   It is a mock step made with RunnableLambda so you can learn the LCEL shape first.

3. StrOutputParser turns the model output into a plain Python string.

This is good for learning because it shows the structure of LCEL without needing API keys.

The important line in your file
chain = prompt | model | parser

That is the core LCEL pattern.

How to run LCEL.py in this repo
Open a terminal in this folder:
C:\Users\gts\Desktop\Platforms Sandbox\Use Case No37\Use Case No37 Testing\test\Agent_Orchestration\Gen-AI-with-LangChain

Option 1: run it with the virtual environment's Python directly
".venv\Scripts\python.exe" LCEL.py

Option 2: if the virtual environment is already activated
python LCEL.py

Run it with a custom topic:
".venv\Scripts\python.exe" LCEL.py prompt templates

What you should expect to see
You should see output similar to this:

Bare-bones LCEL:
prompt | model | parser
Mock response for: Explain LCEL in one short sentence.

If you pass a different topic, the prompt text changes.

How to use LCEL as you keep learning
Start small.
Learn these pieces first:
- prompt templates
- model calls
- output parsers
- RunnableLambda for simple custom steps

After that, move into slightly more advanced patterns:
- passing dictionaries into chains
- branching and routing
- retrieval chains
- tool calling
- agent workflows

What a beginner should focus on first
Do not try to learn all of LangChain at once.
Start with these questions:
- What data goes into the chain?
- What does each step do?
- What comes out of the chain?
- Can I swap one step for another?

If you understand those four questions, LCEL will start to feel simple.

Common beginner mistake
Many beginners jump straight into agents.
That usually becomes confusing fast.

It is better to first understand small chains such as:
prompt -> model -> parser

Agents make more sense after you understand simple chained workflows.

Good next steps after this file
1. Replace the fake model with a real AzureChatOpenAI model.
2. Add one extra LCEL step that changes the text before it reaches the model.
3. Build a chain that takes user input and returns both a short answer and a bullet summary.
4. Learn how LCEL is used inside RAG and agent systems.

Short summary
LCEL is a clean way to connect AI workflow steps together.
It is important because most useful AI systems are multi-step systems.
Learning LCEL gives you the foundation for understanding larger LangChain applications.
